[Amit Varma]: No man ever steps in the same river twice, an old saying goes.
[Amit Varma]: Historians know this better than others.
[Amit Varma]: Most of us normal folks look back on the past as if it is an immovable block of events.
[Amit Varma]: Through the lens of the hindsight bias, it appears that everything that has happened
[Amit Varma]: was inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: But every historian knows that like the present moment, every moment in time was once in a
[Amit Varma]: state of flux, full of possibilities, everything up for grabs.
[Amit Varma]: And yet we take it all for granted, geography, culture, politics.
[Amit Varma]: The historian Ram Guha once wrote about how easy it is to look back and feel secure in
[Amit Varma]: the fact that India is a democracy, that the center did hold, that we are still one nation.
[Amit Varma]: But in the years just after independence, it was all an open question.
[Amit Varma]: Was there such a thing as a coherent idea of India?
[Amit Varma]: Could the Union stay together?
[Amit Varma]: And while India is a fixed notion in our heads, lines on a map, a list of states, an anthem
[Amit Varma]: and a flag, it is true that our country has been in churn throughout its 73 years of existence,
[Amit Varma]: and perhaps now more than ever.
[Amit Varma]: As we celebrate one more Republic Day, let's take stock of our Republic.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: It's the year 2020, 70 years after our Republic came into being.
[Amit Varma]: And looking at the present time, I feel cause for both hope and despair.
[Amit Varma]: Hope because I see young people throughout our country animated with the same spirit
[Amit Varma]: that inspired our freedom fighters, a spirit I had once thought we have lost forever.
[Amit Varma]: And despair because we face an existential crisis and a danger of losing the values that
[Amit Varma]: our founding fathers and mothers embraced for the nation at its birth.
[Amit Varma]: It seems to me more than ever, that perhaps every conversation we have today has more
[Amit Varma]: value, more urgency than it would have in some other time.
[Amit Varma]: There's so much to make sense of and to put in context.
[Amit Varma]: My guest for this episode is Ram Guha, whose books have taught me so much about this country
[Amit Varma]: that I love.
[Amit Varma]: Ram's been on the seen and the unseen before in a two part series to speak about Mahatma
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: And those episodes will be linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: Before we begin this conversation, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: One of the great pleasures of my life is getting to hang out with very smart people.
[Amit Varma]: Many of them work at the Takshashila Institution in Bengaluru, which also supports the seen
[Amit Varma]: and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Some of the brightest people in the policy world work here.
[Amit Varma]: And every time I'm in Bengaluru, I feel so stimulated by the conversations I have, I'd
[Amit Varma]: be happy to be a fly on the wall here forever.
[Amit Varma]: And guess what, I can listen into Takshashila conversations from wherever I am.
[Amit Varma]: And so can you.
[Amit Varma]: The Takshashila Wonks and Geeks have a fantastic daily podcast called All Things Policy, in
[Amit Varma]: which they discuss everything from nuclear submarines to privacy laws to macroeconomic
[Amit Varma]: policy.
[Amit Varma]: The conversations are nerdy, funny, and always insightful.
[Amit Varma]: Listening to All Things Policy always leaves me feeling smarter.
[Amit Varma]: So do search for the show on the podcast app of your choice.
[Amit Varma]: All Things Policy.
[Amit Varma]: Ram, welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: You know, these days, you're sort of, you're speaking a lot, you're out in the public spaces
[Amit Varma]: a lot.
[Amit Varma]: During the CIA protests, you were also famously kind of arrested.
[Amit Varma]: You've sort of spent your life and perhaps it's a cliche, but a historian is normally
[Amit Varma]: thought of as a sedentary figure who's involved in ideas and spends time in libraries.
[Amit Varma]: And now it almost seems that there is a more activist spirit in the things that you do,
[Amit Varma]: much like the people you have written about, like Gandhi.
[Guest]: You know, Amit, when I was young, I participated in a lot of demonstrations on two issues in
[Guest]: particular.
[Guest]: One was the whole question of interfaith harmony.
[Guest]: I was in several marches and protests in Delhi in 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, in the years leading
[Guest]: up to the Babri Majlis and after.
[Guest]: And the other theme on which I did take part in street protests was the environment, you
[Guest]: know, destruction of forests, devastation of Adivasi lands.
[Guest]: I was also part of the anti-nuclear movement, which failed to prevent a nuclear plant coming
[Guest]: up for the Western Ghats in Kerala, a movement that was led by the great Kannada writer and
[Guest]: polymath Shivaram Karanth.
[Guest]: So in my 20s and 30s, I protested.
[Guest]: Then I started writing, focusing on books, whatever I had to say was in my columns.
[Guest]: But two years ago, actually, I joined a protest against a steel flyover that would have devastated
[Guest]: the heart of central Bangalore.
[Guest]: And my wife and I came out and I thought, that's it, you know, it's my city is being
[Guest]: devastated.
[Guest]: And it was clearly a Ponzi scheme in which politicians and contractors, incidentally
[Guest]: of the Congress Party, not of the BJP.
[Guest]: To clarify to your listeners who think I'm always only against the BJP, there was a Ponzi
[Guest]: scheme of the Congress Party aimed to make money before the election.
[Guest]: There are some listeners who seem to think the contrary.
[Guest]: So my wife and I were there, you know, as middle aged citizens.
[Guest]: My wife is a native of Bangalore, I lived there many years protesting.
[Guest]: And that caught some people's eye and I thought that's it.
[Guest]: Then of course, this thing happened and this thing happened, it's really as a biographer
[Guest]: of Gandhi that I feel so awful about the CIA and what it represents is discrimination against
[Guest]: Muslims, the way it was bulldozed through the kind of distorted codes that are used.
[Guest]: And I had a vague inkling I would be detained actually.
[Guest]: I told my wife that it may happen.
[Guest]: And I told her something else I said, look, don't worry, because the Karnataka police
[Guest]: is not the Tamil Nadu police, not even the UP police.
[Guest]: So I had a vague inkling, I didn't think it would happen, but it happened.
[Guest]: And I'm proud that I did what it was a modest act of individual satyagraha, shall we say.
[Guest]: And I was certainly inspired by the students, I was particularly inspired by the students
[Guest]: of Jamia, and particularly horrified like many people all over India were by the vandalizing
[Guest]: of the library.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, let me just tell you one interesting kind of amusing and I suppose
[Guest]: even informative anecdote.
[Guest]: When the Jamia library was vandalized on the 15th, right, when it was vandalized on the
[Guest]: 15th, I got a SMS, a message from a historian in Delhi, asking for a clarification, a factual
[Guest]: clarification.
[Guest]: And this historian asked me, during the Quit India movement, when students participated
[Guest]: and in the anti Indira Gandhi pre-emergency struggle when students participated, did the
[Guest]: police ever vandalize a library?
[Guest]: So this is a query to me as a historian, as someone who'd written both about the 42 movement
[Guest]: and the students movement led by Jai Prakash Narayan.
[Guest]: And I replied to this friend in Delhi simply, no, because Indira Gandhi and the Viceroy
[Guest]: were authoritarians who read books.
[Guest]: Now it is partly a joke, partly serious, but I think many people were horrified by what
[Guest]: happened to the Jamia library.
[Guest]: And I think that led to shortly afterwards, there was a protest in Bangalore, which I
[Guest]: did.
[Guest]: And then of course, this is this whole, the 19th, which became a very, very big thing.
[Guest]: And the 19th was the 70th anniversary of two events.
[Guest]: That's why it was chosen to recall why the 19th of December, which I think future historians
[Guest]: may write about in some detail, was the day on which there were anti-CIA protests all
[Guest]: over India, right?
[Guest]: In Delhi, there was a big one in Kolkata, in Mumbai, a huge one in Mumbai, and so on.
[Guest]: And the 19th of December was chosen by the organizers for two reasons.
[Guest]: I think the principal reason was that it was the 92nd anniversary of 19th December, 1927
[Guest]: was the day on which two revolutionaries, Ashfaqullah Khan and Ram Prasad Bismil were
[Guest]: hanged by the British, a Hindu and a Muslim.
[Guest]: So that was one reason it was chosen.
[Guest]: And the other reason it was chosen was because on that same day, 19th December, 1947, Mahatma
[Guest]: Gandhi assured the mayors of the Mewat region, what is now Haryana, that they would be safe
[Guest]: and secure in India, and they face horrific ethnic cleansing, particularly in the in the
[Guest]: princely state of Alwar, and Gandhiji went to Mewat and told them that he would lay his
[Guest]: life on the line for them to stay.
[Guest]: So it was a very important, it was two major anniversaries on that day.
[Guest]: That's why you had these countrywide protests, and they were amazing.
[Guest]: I mean, it was truly amazing what happened everywhere.
[Guest]: I could say a little bit about the politics of the Bangalore protest, if you wish.
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: This is kind of a sociological point, you see, on the 15th, Jamia was vandalized.
[Guest]: That evening, there were auto attacks on the AMU.
[Guest]: And I think the government and particularly the Home Minister believed that nothing would
[Guest]: happen.
[Guest]: You know, it would just die down because we've attacked two Muslim institutions, AMU and
[Guest]: Jamia and sab log chup honge.
[Guest]: But people were outraged, as I've explained, young students all over were outraged by the
[Guest]: attacks on these two universities by the pulling out of women from the library of the vandalizing
[Guest]: of the bookcases.
[Guest]: And you will recall that on the 16th, 17th, tens of thousands of students from totally
[Guest]: previously apolitical institutions, such as the Institute of Technology, the Institutes
[Guest]: of Management, the National Law Schools, Christ College, all protested, right.
[Guest]: And then the 19th was announced.
[Guest]: Now, it'd be interesting to know who chose the 19th.
[Guest]: These are the two reasons people chose the 19th.
[Guest]: I mean, I heard of the 19th from Yogendra Yadav, but there would be other people on
[Guest]: Twitter, but there'd be other people who'd been involved.
[Guest]: And when it was announced that there'd be a countrywide protest on the 19th, the home
[Guest]: ministry in Delhi, I mean, it is my view that the BJP in Delhi, whether it's the home ministry
[Guest]: with the BJP in Delhi said that in BJP rule states, there'll not be a chuharacha.
[Guest]: And it was a really diabolical plan.
[Guest]: So there was going to be section 144 in Karnataka on the 19th, the 20th and the 21st imposed
[Guest]: from Delhi, I'm convinced, probably over the heads of the advice of the Karnataka government.
[Guest]: And maybe even sections of the Karnataka BJP did not want it.
[Guest]: But it was imposed.
[Guest]: And the idea was it'll be imposed on the 19th, the 20th and the 21st of December.
[Guest]: And the 22nd was a Sunday on 19th at midnight, section 144 would be lifted on the 22nd.
[Guest]: The state apparatus would have been brought out for a pro-CAA BJP rally in Bangalore.
[Guest]: That was the plan and it went completely all right, because we protested and there was
[Guest]: a major, you know, kind of a show and when some people got arrested, more people came.
[Guest]: And finally, section 144 wasn't really implemented in any serious way after the first round of
[Guest]: arrest and several thousand people, you know, came to the town hall.
[Guest]: But it's the kind of diabolical mentality of the ruling regime.
[Guest]: That 19, 20, 21, section 144.
[Guest]: And it will be lifted on the Sunday when people will be bused to show some kind of manufactured
[Guest]: support for the CAA.
[Guest]: So I think this is the kind of things that prompted all of this.
[Guest]: And it's very heartening.
[Guest]: You mentioned in your introductory remarks, the students, right now, one of the very interesting
[Guest]: aspects of these protests, which started, I think, with Jamia was that the kind of iconography
[Guest]: of these protests, who are these people upholding, Ambedkar, Gandhi and Bhagat Singh.
[Guest]: Normally one doesn't see these people together.
[Guest]: I mean, normally, you know, the kind of presentation is Ambedkar and Gandhi were rivals or Gandhi
[Guest]: and Bhagat Singh were rivals.
[Guest]: But it's very interesting that the students have brought these three people together.
[Guest]: And I think there's a reason for this.
[Guest]: Ambedkar, because he gave us our rights.
[Guest]: I mean, today there was a very good Twitter thread by Omer Ahmed, where he said that though
[Guest]: Gandhi led the freedom struggle, it was Ambedkar who gave us our rights.
[Guest]: And that's why Ambedkar, in many ways, predominates in these protests, right?
[Guest]: But Gandhi, because Gandhi lived and died for Hindu Muslim harmony.
[Guest]: And Bhagat Singh, because he represents the idealism and the spirit and the unquenchable
[Guest]: spirit of the young.
[Guest]: So it's a very interesting juxtaposition, you know, and I think it's also kind of, I
[Guest]: salute it because we can draw from all these.
[Guest]: It is, you can draw from Ambedkar and Gandhi and Bhagat Singh.
[Guest]: And it's interesting to see who's not there.
[Guest]: You know, Savarkar will never be there or Golwalkar will never be there.
[Guest]: So I think the students have been quite extraordinary.
[Guest]: And 99% have been nonviolent.
[Guest]: And whenever I've spoken, I've always urged the students to be nonviolent.
[Guest]: I think that's where it's either must be resolute, courageous, but above all, nonviolent, not
[Guest]: just in deed, but also in words.
[Guest]: You know, I think one of the ways of shaming the ruling regime is to not to use their resort
[Guest]: to their demonizing, abusing language.
[Amit Varma]: So I recorded an episode earlier today, we are recording this on January 23rd, I recorded
[Amit Varma]: an episode earlier today with Rane Koteswani on Radically Networked Societies.
[Amit Varma]: And he made the very interesting point that one of the fundamental clashes in all our
[Amit Varma]: society is not just in India, is between a society that is in his words, radically networked
[Amit Varma]: by radical fundamentally networked, not the other sense of the term, and therefore fairly
[Amit Varma]: flat and you're up against a state which is very hierarchical and top down where information
[Amit Varma]: flows slowly.
[Amit Varma]: So the term that Pranay in fact used was that we have a state which is a relic of the industrial
[Amit Varma]: age against a society which is a product of the information age.
[Amit Varma]: And listening to you when you were talking about, for example, plans from Delhi to sort
[Amit Varma]: of section 144 on the 1920 or 21st and all of that, it struck me that we also have a
[Amit Varma]: state with a tribal mentality against a society with a globalized mentality.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something that you would say is an accurate character?
[Guest]: I mean, it's very interesting insight, it's probably too early to say how this, you know,
[Guest]: because unfortunately, because, you know, the state has deep pockets and vast resources,
[Guest]: including punitive resources, which the protests don't, you know, so even if they have a tribal
[Guest]: mentality, and they're not so agile, in the way in which the protesters are, they have
[Guest]: the resources to exhaust the protesters.
[Guest]: So it's a little early to say, it's a little early to be incredibly celebratory about these
[Guest]: protests and where they'll take us.
[Amit Varma]: I think these phrasings didn't come out in a celebratory way, but just in a way to try
[Amit Varma]: and understand what's happening.
[Amit Varma]: Obviously, the state has enormous coercive power and monopoly and violence.
[Amit Varma]: Another thing that struck me when you were talking about the attack on the library in
[Amit Varma]: Jamia is something I read last night, in a book by the Turkish author, Zeynep Tufekci,
[Amit Varma]: and which is called Twitter and tear gas.
[Amit Varma]: And she talks about all the protests of the Arab Spring across Tunisia and Egypt and later
[Amit Varma]: spreading to Spain and Turkey and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And there's one very interesting fact, which just blew my mind like my eyes popped out,
[Amit Varma]: which was that one common element to many of these protests, you know, whether it is
[Amit Varma]: in Istanbul, or whether it is even the Occupy movement in New York, is that wherever you
[Amit Varma]: have these large gatherings in these parks, or whatever, become centers of protests, a
[Amit Varma]: library springs up.
[Amit Varma]: And I immediately thought of what's happening in Shaheen Bagh, where you know, there's been
[Amit Varma]: a spontaneous library springing up.
[Amit Varma]: And and of course, you know, many things in common with what's happening right now, the
[Amit Varma]: role of the youth, the role of women, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But this really struck me, because I mean, are there sort of echoes of this through history
[Guest]: that libraries have some kind of significance?
[Guest]: The echoes through history are possibly the reverse, that authoritarian regimes don't
[Guest]: like books, don't like learning, don't like education.
[Guest]: And certainly this regime doesn't, you know, as shown in the various education ministers
[Guest]: is appointed in the ways in which ministers, including the Prime Minister's first day qualifications,
[Guest]: in the ways in which vice chancellors are appointed in the ways in which modern science
[Guest]: is delegated.
[Guest]: So authoritarian regimes, you know, don't like free speech, learning scholarship, ideas
[Guest]: of that was true of Stalin, it was through Mao and his Cultural Revolution, in which
[Guest]: all the professors were dismissed from their jobs, and it's true of this regime.
[Amit Varma]: So I wasn't planning to actually ask this question during this episode, but it strikes
[Amit Varma]: me now and I'll ask it anyway, since you're talking about authoritarian regimes and their
[Amit Varma]: sort of disrespect for learning, I'd written a piece a while back where I had speculated,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it was based on a story that a friend of Narendra Modi told me.
[Amit Varma]: And the story basically was this that once she was sitting at his place in when he was
[Amit Varma]: CM of Gujarat in 2007, 2008, sometime around that time, and there was a gathering of seven
[Amit Varma]: or eight people and the Prime Minister told them a story about how once when he was young,
[Amit Varma]: his mother was very ill, she had fever.
[Amit Varma]: So he went to switch on the fan and he flicked the switch on and he found that the fan didn't
[Amit Varma]: come on because there was no electricity.
[Amit Varma]: And at that time, apparently Modi teared up genuinely because it affected him.
[Amit Varma]: And my friend's point was that Modi because he does not read, which mind you, was not
[Amit Varma]: his fault, because obviously, he's not born to privilege and doesn't have access to books.
[Amit Varma]: Because he doesn't read his understanding of the world is an experiential understanding.
[Amit Varma]: So he experiences what the lack of electricity can do.
[Amit Varma]: So when he is CM in Gujarat, he makes that a priority power in every village.
[Amit Varma]: You know, he can see he can experience the value of roads and cleanliness and water and
[Amit Varma]: water.
[Amit Varma]: So all of those, he makes a priority, but at a larger level, when you're actually governing
[Amit Varma]: a country, in fact, the higher up you go, you also need a great grasp of abstract concepts
[Amit Varma]: and to be able to deal with learning.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, while it's not his fault that he is not a well read person, because you
[Amit Varma]: know, he didn't have that sort of privileged childhood, one would then say that the requirement
[Amit Varma]: for a leader is to have the humility to surround himself with learned people and take the advice.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, he's a phenomenally intelligent man.
[Guest]: So first of all, I completely agree with you.
[Guest]: I think I've also heard this from other people, that he saw his mother suffer, go far away
[Guest]: for water, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And this is part of his welfare agenda.
[Guest]: I completely believe that based on seeing him in interact and speak, I think he's a
[Guest]: very quick learner.
[Guest]: He is an autodidact who picks up things incredibly quickly, much quicker than any other politician
[Guest]: I have seen, certainly much quicker than the likes of Rahul Gandhi.
[Guest]: You know, you can talk to him on solar energy, and he will then pick up on the important
[Guest]: aspects of solar energy, or agriculture, or infrastructure, or artificial intelligence.
[Guest]: He's got a very amazing ability to pick up new facts, new things.
[Guest]: But the real flaw he has, and I wrote a column last week in The Telegraph about this, is
[Guest]: he doesn't, what you just said, he doesn't cultivate or trust advisors, partly because
[Guest]: of this suspicion of acquired scholarship.
[Guest]: You know, he's notoriously mocked about Harvard versus hard work, but also partly because,
[Guest]: you know, he can't build a team.
[Guest]: Brian Modi is always more important than Team Modi.
[Guest]: You know, in that column, I quoted someone who has worked with him, who said that the
[Guest]: golden rule of working with Modi is, when you give advice, total obsequiousness, no
[Guest]: credit.
[Guest]: All right, now that's, you know, it's like, you can't, you can't run a large complex government
[Guest]: in that way.
[Guest]: I mean, if you look at his first term, he had Raghuram Rajan at different points, Raghuram
[Guest]: Rajan, Arvind Subramanian, Urjit Patel, and Arvind Palagriha, four top class economists.
[Guest]: But none of them could work with him.
[Guest]: I mean, Palagriha maybe, you know, could, but then left, right, now he has none of them.
[Guest]: He had people in the civil service who were capable in his first term.
[Guest]: But in his second term, he doesn't have any, because, you know, if you only cultivate a
[Guest]: certain kind of obsequiousness, you'll get that kind of advisor who's second guessing
[Guest]: what the prime minister wants, who can never give you frank and open hearted advice.
[Guest]: So I think that is really his great flaw.
[Guest]: And apart from his sectarianism, which has been noted and widely commented upon, but
[Guest]: apart from the ideology, I think it's a personality flaw, a person who cannot build a team, who
[Guest]: thinks that a few bureaucrats will run the show for him, who consistently undermines
[Guest]: his cabinet ministers.
[Guest]: I'll give you one example of this, you know, Arun Jaitley was very close to Modi.
[Guest]: He saved his job in 2002.
[Guest]: He advised him on many legal issues.
[Guest]: They were very close, right, had been for many years.
[Guest]: But he was still not willing to give Jaitley, you know, complete autonomy in running his
[Guest]: ministry.
[Guest]: Now it's well known, or it's overwhelmingly likely that Jaitley was not consulted about
[Guest]: demonetization.
[Guest]: This has been spoken about, but there's another telling, smaller, but telling episode, which
[Guest]: tells you how he did not even respect Jaitley in the way you should respect your senior
[Guest]: cabinet colleague.
[Guest]: Jaitley had gone for an IMF meeting in Washington, when his beto noire, an arch enemy within
[Guest]: the party, Subramaniam Swamy was appointed a Rajya Sabha MP.
[Guest]: So Mr. Modi was telling Jaitley, even you better watch out, I'll put someone, you know,
[Guest]: at your heels.
[Guest]: Now you can't run a team like this, you just can't run a team in this kind of insecure
[Guest]: paranoid way.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I intended this episode and intend this episode to be more about the broader
[Amit Varma]: currents of history than individuals.
[Amit Varma]: But I can't help but follow up and ask another question, which is, how much of and this is
[Amit Varma]: not just in the context of Modi, but you know, I'll come to that.
[Amit Varma]: How much of history is determined by the happenstance of particular individuals and positions of
[Amit Varma]: power and I'll break it up into two parts.
[Amit Varma]: One part is of course, the present part, where it isn't necessary that the head of the BJP
[Amit Varma]: would necessarily be somebody like Modi when we've had leaders like Vajpayee before.
[Amit Varma]: That's one thing and you have a current of events like what happened in Gujarat where
[Amit Varma]: you know, it the rights arguably helped him consolidate his position, Pramod Mahajan dying
[Amit Varma]: at a point where he was fairly strong influence in the party and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And eventually he comes to power.
[Amit Varma]: And the other element of happenstance, which I suspect that you'll have a strong opinion
[Amit Varma]: on is, it strikes me that, you know, over the last year, I've done a number of episodes
[Amit Varma]: trying to understand Hindu conservatism and sort of looking at the history of this last
[Amit Varma]: century.
[Amit Varma]: And it struck me over this time that we were in a sense, very lucky to have Nehru as Prime
[Amit Varma]: Minister at the time he was, because it seems to me that a lot of the leaders around him
[Amit Varma]: in the Congress Party were either conservatives, and I don't mean that in a bad way, as you
[Amit Varma]: know, the current, but were Hindu conservatives leader, not Hindu conservative leaders, like
[Amit Varma]: you know, Patel, Prasad, Pant and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And he almost seems like a force apart, even when it comes to the episode of the Ram idol
[Amit Varma]: being actually planted in the Babri Marjid, which was a Hindu Mahasabha plot.
[Amit Varma]: But when Nehru said get the idol out immediately, you know, Pant was CM of UP, Lal Bahadur Shastri
[Amit Varma]: was Home Minister of UP and they ignored him because their sympathies lay with the cause.
[Amit Varma]: So how much of our history is determined by this sort of happenstance and in the case
[Amit Varma]: of Nehru, I've asked this to various people, I'd love to know what you think.
[Guest]: I think it's a balance.
[Guest]: I think Marxist historians diminish the role of individuals in history.
[Guest]: Though ironically, they exalt Lenin and Mao as great figures, I mean, the first great
[Guest]: personality cult was of Stalin, and then of course, the second one of Mao, the other biographically
[Guest]: oriented historians, for example, in North America, where you have all these biographies
[Guest]: of founders, you know, this great Washington, Jefferson, they're the people who changed
[Guest]: everything, which is the balance, the social, political, structural forces that operate
[Guest]: that constrain what even the most remarkable individual can do.
[Guest]: But individuals in positions of power, particularly, can shape the direction a society, a government
[Guest]: and administration, a regime takes.
[Guest]: There's no question about that.
[Guest]: Also, you know, the removal of individuals, I mean, you mentioned Pramodh Majan, right?
[Guest]: Now, you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: Now, if Pramodh Majan had been around, he'd have been a major challenger to Modi, because
[Guest]: he had very good relations, he was close to the Bombay moneybags, he had good relations
[Guest]: across parties, he was very smart, he was self made, he had administrative experience,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Similarly, if Tilak had not died when he did, maybe Gandhi would not have had the opening
[Guest]: to become the leader of the freedom movement.
[Guest]: So accidents of this kind do play a part, without question.
[Guest]: But of course, as Marx himself said, you know, men make history, but not in the circumstances
[Guest]: of their choosing.
[Guest]: So Modi could not have done what he did, right early on to become prime minister had the
[Guest]: Congress regime not had the kind of, you know, problems that it did, right?
[Guest]: So but this is really, I mean, this is really a two person regime.
[Guest]: And there's not been a two person regime in India.
[Guest]: Even Nehru, you know, trusted, of course, Patel died, but he trusted his ministers and
[Guest]: above all, he respected, he would take advice from professionals, you know, he would not
[Guest]: not decide the Gamla Reserve Bank, if he wanted to do something, he would consult the Gamla
[Guest]: Reserve Bank on science policy, he would consult Bhabha, right, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So this kind of absolute centralization of decision making,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one could argue Indira Gandhi, we have not noted since Indira Gandhi's time.
[Amit Varma]: True.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about broader trends now in this in an excellent speech you gave at the Kerala
[Amit Varma]: Lit Fest, where unfortunately, once, you know, stray line at the end got all the media attention,
[Amit Varma]: but I really enjoyed the speech, especially for the and it'll be linked from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes, especially for the meat of the speech, where you talk about how the notion of nationalism
[Amit Varma]: evolved around the world, but the divergent path that notion took in India, can you can
[Guest]: you elaborate a bit on that?
[Guest]: Yeah, so essentially, nationalism in 19th century Europe, where it was the first force
[Guest]: in a systematic way, was oriented towards, you know, making the citizens of a nation
[Guest]: or a particular unified territory, protected by boundaries and an army, making those citizens
[Guest]: come together on the basis of a single religion, a single language and frequently a common
[Guest]: enemy.
[Guest]: So to be English, you have to speak English, the minority tongues were obliterated or marginalized.
[Guest]: To be truly English, you had to be a Protestant, which is why the king was also head of the
[Guest]: church, and you had to hate France, right?
[Guest]: Now, that kind of model of nationalism, of course, and I argued only partly in just that
[Guest]: Pakistan is really a perfect 19th century European nation, India, I think, again, very
[Guest]: much because of Gandhi and very much because of Gandhi's diasporic experience, but he recognized
[Guest]: that extraordinary religious and linguistic diversity of India, which he encountered in
[Guest]: South Africa, was something that we nurtured, appreciated, enhanced, and nationalism had
[Guest]: to be built on shared values, not on shared identities, not on common religion, common
[Guest]: language, common enemy, but on gender and caste equalities, economic self-reliance,
[Guest]: non-violence, Hindu-Muslim pluralism, Hindu-Muslim unity, and so on, right?
[Guest]: Now, and the constitution in many ways takes that vision much further.
[Guest]: I also argued that there were sections of the Indian left that did not subscribe to
[Guest]: this because they did, I mean, their heroes were somewhere else and it's also got me in
[Guest]: trouble in Kerala, among the leftists, because I said, you know, for them, it was always
[Guest]: Stalin and Mao over Gandhi, right?
[Guest]: And today, it may be Hugo Chavez, and I don't know, Hugo Chavez is dead.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't know who the hero of the global left is.
[Amit Varma]: Corbyn and Sanders, perhaps.
[Amit Varma]: Corbyn and Sanders.
[Guest]: Corbyn and Sanders.
[Guest]: I mean, Corbyn and Sanders.
[Guest]: I mean, it's astonishing how some young Indian leftists revere Corbyn.
[Guest]: I mean, I mean, the only thing that can be said about Corbyn is that he's a slightly
[Guest]: better version of Rahul Gandhi.
[Guest]: I mean, he's a born loser.
[Guest]: Basically, he's a born loser with huge flaws, huge flaws in his ideology, in his personality,
[Guest]: in the way.
[Guest]: So but this kind of sentimental looking outside, right, to heroes, meant that the left was
[Guest]: kind of marginalized.
[Guest]: So great pity, great pity, because they could have contributed a lot had they stayed within
[Guest]: the mainstream of the freedom movement.
[Guest]: On the other hand, the gun, more strongly and more viscerally and more effectively,
[Guest]: the Gandhian model of patriotism was attacked from the right by Hindutva, which actually
[Guest]: prescribed in a curious way to a European model of nationalism.
[Guest]: To be an Indian, you have to be a Hindu.
[Guest]: To be a true Indian, you have to speak Hindi.
[Guest]: And to be a truer Indian, you have to hate Pakistan, you know, that's kind of the model
[Guest]: of nationalism.
[Amit Varma]: Hate Pakistan later, but hate Muslims to begin with, pre-independence.
[Guest]: Yes, hate Muslims to begin with, but also actually hate Pakistan to begin with, because
[Guest]: hate Muslims came from, why did partition happen?
[Guest]: Because the Muslims, we could not trust them, right.
[Guest]: So I talked about this, why the Gandhian model of patriotism ceded ground to the Hindutva
[Guest]: model of Jingoism and why we need to reclaim it.
[Guest]: But I also talked about, you know, the failures of the left, the failures of the Congress
[Guest]: Party, the growth of religious fundamentalism worldwide, and how this is played into the
[Guest]: hands of Hindutva.
[Guest]: But I mean, I'm someone who has always called himself a patriot.
[Guest]: I've never been shy.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't believe you can be a world citizen.
[Guest]: I mean, I believe that you can be a citizen of Bangalore, of Church Street, where we are
[Guest]: talking, of the contourment, of Karnataka, of India, but because you can identify with
[Guest]: your locality, your town, your taluk, your district, your watershed, you could even be
[Guest]: a citizen of the Kaveri Delta if you live there, right?
[Guest]: All right.
[Guest]: The Kaveri Delta may spill over more than one state.
[Guest]: But world citizen is an abstract idea.
[Guest]: It's a cop out.
[Guest]: I, in the last, absolutely in the last paragraphs of India after Gandhi, I quote J.B.S.
[Guest]: Haldane, who's a British scientist who became an Indian and whom Saban Sivaramanandan has
[Guest]: recently written a book.
[Guest]: And he says, you cannot be a world citizen because there is no world government.
[Guest]: And one of the chief duties of a citizen is to be a nuisance to his or her government.
[Guest]: That's one of the chief duties of a citizen.
[Guest]: That's what the citizens of Shaheen Bagh and a hundred other places are doing.
[Guest]: They're being a nuisance to the bad policies of their government.
[Guest]: Another remark relevant to that is by Benedict Anderson, the great theorist of nationalism.
[Guest]: And he says, a true nationalist will feel a sense of shame at the crimes committed by
[Guest]: his state.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, again, one of the aspects of the Gandhian model of nationalism, which actually comes
[Guest]: more from Tagore than from Gandhi, or two aspects of the Gandhian model of nationalism,
[Guest]: which comes more from Tagore than from Gandhi, are the openness to other civilizations.
[Guest]: So when Tagore says, a glory in the lamp, a glory in the illumination of a lamp, lit
[Guest]: anywhere in the world, right, that is that you learn from other cultures, you know, no
[Amit Varma]: nation is a frog in the well, you learn from other cultures.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, Tagore also famously said, nationalism is, quote, the particular thing which for
[Amit Varma]: years has been at the bottom of India's troubles.
[Guest]: So, and also the sense that no nation is perfect, it's always, you're always trying to redeem
[Guest]: yourself by improving yourself, you know, you're not flawless in the way in which, Hindutva
[Guest]: believes ancient Hindus were fine, perfect, you know, they invented everything.
[Guest]: And they even claim that the caste system came with the Muslim, which is totally absurd.
[Guest]: You know, it's been there before ever, right?
[Guest]: They claim that we practice, that Shivaji practiced perfect gender equality, which is
[Guest]: complete nonsense, right?
[Guest]: So I think these are aspects of the Gandhian model of patriotism, and not just religious
[Guest]: diversity, religious pluralism, not just caste and gender equality, but the ability to reflect
[Guest]: on your flaws, your failures, to overcome them, to look at what our other countries
[Guest]: are doing, maybe learn from them, and this kind of, you know, you can also learn from
[Guest]: other states, Karnataka can learn from Tamil Nadu, Tamil Nadu can learn from Kerala, UP
[Guest]: can learn a hell of a lot from Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Kerala, all right.
[Guest]: So I think these are aspects of patriotism, I think, that are glossed over in the kind
[Guest]: of jingoistic, hyper nationalistic, Hindutva view of what it is to be an Indian.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a follow up question.
[Amit Varma]: But before a follow up question, an interesting anecdote for my listeners that the last time
[Amit Varma]: you and I recorded Ram, I happened to mention to you at the end of the recording, that you
[Amit Varma]: know, Church Street is of course, the best street in the world for me.
[Amit Varma]: And part of that is because it has Blossoms, which is the best bookshop in the country.
[Amit Varma]: And you responded by saying Blossoms the best bookshop in the country, it's not even the
[Amit Varma]: best bookshop in its own street.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's a joint best.
[Amit Varma]: So my follow up question is this, that your thesis there was that there was a kind of
[Amit Varma]: European nationalism, which is bound up in love for a particular, you know, identity,
[Amit Varma]: a land, a language, and a hatred for the other, and a religion.
[Amit Varma]: And that has now taken form in India in the form of Hindutva, which is inspired by that.
[Amit Varma]: And you pointed out that Gandhi's kind of nationalism was sort of different.
[Amit Varma]: Now I have two questions.
[Amit Varma]: One is that, is it the case that during the freedom struggle, that they were contesting
[Amit Varma]: notions of nationalism, not just these two, but various others.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, Bose had his own notions, Gandhi had his own notions, Motilal Nehru had his own
[Amit Varma]: notions, and you have all of these different notions, and we could be in hindsight saying
[Guest]: that, oh, okay.
[Guest]: You're right.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So you mentioned three people right now, Bose, Motilal Nehru and Gandhi himself.
[Guest]: So there were things that, you know, Bose, Motilal Nehru, and Gandhi, all completely
[Guest]: believed in Hindu-Muslim harmony, totally shared it, right?
[Guest]: Like Gandhi differed from them, Bose, like Gandhi, believed in gender equality, in fact,
[Guest]: in a more radical way than Gandhi, I mean, he started a women's regiment, for example,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Gandhi's, I think Gandhi's originality lay in two things.
[Guest]: One, his attack on the caste system, and particularly untouchability.
[Guest]: I mean, I know, I believe he's been unfairly demonized by the Ambedkarites, you know, with
[Guest]: the virtue of hindsight.
[Guest]: I mean, Ambedkar was a great leader, a great prophet.
[Guest]: He was the emancipator of the untouchables.
[Guest]: And you know, not just the Dalits, but all of India owes enormous debt to him.
[Guest]: But you should not polarize Ambedkar against Gandhi when it comes to the question of caste
[Guest]: and untouchability, because if Ambedkar was a great emancipator of the Dalits, the greatest
[Guest]: leader to emerge from within the Dalits, no upper caste Hindu did more to challenge untouchability
[Guest]: than Gandhi, right?
[Guest]: And that the sin of untouchability, Gandhi recognized in a way in which Bose, Motilal
[Guest]: Nehru, Jawaharlal Nehru, Bhagat Singh did not.
[Guest]: He called untouchability diarism of Hinduism.
[Guest]: He compared it to general diarism, you know, where Hindus would treat other people as being
[Guest]: inferior to them because of the caste in which they were born.
[Guest]: He compared it to general diarism.
[Guest]: And finally, nonviolence.
[Guest]: I think that's, of course, the major departure that he had from Bose.
[Guest]: So there was a shared common ground between Gandhi and many of the others, you know, Srinivasa
[Guest]: Shastri, who was a great liberal, Tej Bahadur Sapru.
[Guest]: But I think nonviolence, economic self-reliance, and above all, the attack on untouchability,
[Guest]: I think sets Gandhi apart.
[Guest]: And finally, two other things set Gandhi apart.
[Guest]: One was his ability to have a debate, reflect, change his mind.
[Guest]: I mean, if you look at how his views on caste became more radicalized, it was because of
[Guest]: his exchanges, first with Narayana Guru, the great Malayali reformer, and then with Ambedkar.
[Guest]: So his ability to grow, change his mind.
[Guest]: And the second truly remarkable thing about Gandhi, which in a way brings us back to Moli
[Guest]: and Nehru, is that Moli and Nehru left no second run, they had no successors.
[Guest]: Gandhi left a whole team.
[Guest]: I mean, I wrote a piece to coincide with the 150th anniversary of Gandhi's birth, which
[Guest]: I called the 12 Apostles of Mahatma Gandhi.
[Guest]: I could have called it 24, right?
[Guest]: But I chose 12 people, you know, so in government, Nehru, Patel, Rajendra Prasad.
[Guest]: In opposition, Kripalani, Jayaprakash Narayan, Rajaji.
[Guest]: In social work, Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay, Medulla Sarabhai, you know, Jessie Kumarappa,
[Guest]: Meera Band, that's 10.
[Guest]: Then I talked about Gafar Khan, I forget who the 12th was, because, you know, but there
[Guest]: could have been many, many more, you know, Zakir Hussain in education.
[Guest]: So Gandhi was a great team builder.
[Guest]: You know, he nurtured people, he identified talent, he met people, identified their talent,
[Guest]: nurtured their talent, and then set them free.
[Guest]: He told Kumarappa, the work of village renewal is yours.
[Guest]: He told Zakir Hussain, the work of education is yours.
[Guest]: He told Nehru and Patel, the work of running an independent India is yours.
[Guest]: Now that kind of extraordinary ability that Gandhi had is given to very few, is given
[Guest]: to very few, you know, it may have been there in, you know, there may have been some great
[Guest]: entrepreneurs who built teams of that kind, but political leaders who nurtured talent
[Guest]: in that way, and, you know, Gandhi died, but the country continued because of all these
[Guest]: people who are there in public office, in the civil society movement, in universities,
[Amit Varma]: all inspired by him.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, as an aside, you know, just regarding the dichotomy and possibly the false dichotomy
[Amit Varma]: between Nehru and Ambedkar, I've been reading this book by D. R. Nagraj called The Flaming
[Guest]: Feet, and D. R. Nagraj, by the way, was a close friend of mine, and I miss him almost
[Guest]: every day.
[Guest]: And he was the most brilliant intellectual of his generation.
[Guest]: We are speaking in Takshashila office in Church Street.
[Guest]: I met him for the last time in Koshy's, which is down the road, the day before he died.
[Guest]: Oh, my God.
[Guest]: I mean, he was extraordinary mind.
[Guest]: He was brilliant.
[Guest]: He was in his 40s.
[Guest]: He was going to contribute enormously to our cultural and intellectual life, had he lived
[Guest]: another 10 or 15 years.
[Guest]: He had a wonderful, subtle mind.
[Guest]: He bridged the vernacular and the cosmopolitan, the civilizational and the kind of, you know,
[Guest]: ground up view of peasants.
[Guest]: He came from a religious background, he knew several languages, he was a theorist but deeply
[Guest]: grounded in empirical reality.
[Guest]: And his student Prithvi Datta Chandrashobhi, fortunately has edited two outstanding books
[Guest]: of his essays, one of which is Flaming Feet and the other I think is called Listening
[Guest]: to One's Loom, Listening to the Loom.
[Guest]: But he was truly, I mean, I said I miss him and my understanding of Gandhi and Ambedkar
[Guest]: is deeply indebted to what he wrote and to our conversations in Koshy's Cafe.
[Amit Varma]: Those books will be linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a follow up question on nationalism and at one level, I would even perhaps respectfully
[Amit Varma]: dispute your terming Gandhi's view of the world and all of the other great leaders that
[Guest]: we spoke about as nationalism itself.
[Guest]: I call it patriotism.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'd call it, I'd call it something else.
[Amit Varma]: What do you call it?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'd call it patriotism or I'd call it whatever, but because for example, and there's
[Amit Varma]: a larger sort of question I'm coming to, you know, Popper once described nationalism as
[Amit Varma]: something that, quote, appeals to our tribal instincts, to passion and to prejudice and
[Amit Varma]: to our nostalgic desire to be relieved from the strain of individual responsibility, which
[Amit Varma]: it attempts to replace by a collective or group responsibility, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I was kind of thinking about how the only kind of nationalism which has any kind of
[Amit Varma]: resonance and which is on the resurgence today is a model of that 19th century European nationalism,
[Amit Varma]: which is all over the world and which is in India.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a very interesting book by the Israeli scholar Yael Tamir called Why Nationalism?
[Amit Varma]: And she points out a couple of things here.
[Amit Varma]: She says that one, this kind of nationalism is inevitable because only the stat she gives
[Amit Varma]: us only 3.3% of the world's population actually lives outside their country of birth.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, which is a surprise to me because I have lived and traveled in globalized cities
[Amit Varma]: sort of all my life, and she therefore says that that nationalism is necessary because
[Amit Varma]: it quote, endows a state with intimate feelings linking the past, the present and the future,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And she makes a distinction I found very useful in thinking about it between thick identities
[Amit Varma]: and thin identities, where I think she would hold that a humanist liberal like me who you
[Amit Varma]: know, sees himself as part of a globalized world, but that identity is too thin and thick
[Amit Varma]: identities which are bound by communities and cultures and ways of doing things and
[Amit Varma]: norms and conventions are much thicker.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, it is necessarily the case that that kind of nationalism will win out
[Guest]: over whatever we see is a very special case because of the persecution of the Jews.
[Guest]: And they had to find a homeland because they were so brutalized and, you know, subject
[Amit Varma]: to really some exterminate almost exterminate.
[Guest]: I think Yael Tamir lives and teaches in London, but I think my talk was called patriotism
[Guest]: versus jingoism.
[Guest]: So I believe there are two I mean, these are two, two, you could say, cousins, both from
[Guest]: the same offspring from nationalism.
[Guest]: One takes the path of openness, dialogue, diversity, and the other is like the hard
[Guest]: line kind of, you know, jingoistic model.
[Guest]: And I said that patriotism is suffused with love and understanding and jingoism by revenge
[Guest]: and hatred.
[Guest]: That's how I put it.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Now, I also believe to expand on a point I made briefly, that you can have overlapping
[Guest]: identities.
[Guest]: You can be a South Sea patriot, a Bangalore patriot, I mean, even in Israel, Israel is
[Guest]: much smaller, right?
[Guest]: You can be a Haifa patriot, you know, a Negev, a dead desert patriot, identify with the land
[Guest]: and also, but you can't really be a global citizen.
[Guest]: In that sense, this scholar is right.
[Guest]: I mean, that, you know, you can't be a cosmopolitan going all over the world.
[Guest]: And because, particularly because of that figure she quoted, 97 percent of the world's
[Guest]: population continues to live in the nation state in which they were born.
[Guest]: So that's where they have to claim their rights from the state.
[Guest]: You know, a Columbia professor can say, I'm a world citizen, right?
[Guest]: The resident of upstate New York who has never had a passport, right, has to be an American
[Guest]: citizen demanding that his or her government treats him or her fairly and, you know, respectfully.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So I think the globalized left and the cosmopolitan liberal have underestimated the force of not
[Guest]: just the force, the importance and the legitimacy of nationalism.
[Guest]: Now, I mentioned Benedict Anderson.
[Guest]: Now you quoted Popper.
[Guest]: Now I'm not sure what, was Popper Jewish?
[Amit Varma]: Almost certainly he was.
[Amit Varma]: His grandparents were Jewish, but they were not devout.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: All right.
[Guest]: Now, this is very interesting.
[Guest]: I'll tell you why.
[Guest]: Because Benedict Anderson says in his book, it says somewhere, the great theorists of
[Guest]: nationalism, Eric Hobson, Ernest Gellner, Hans Kohn, Anthony Smith, were all Jewish.
[Guest]: And Jews are congenitally suspicious of nationalism in the way in which Popper was also Jewish
[Guest]: is because they suffered so much from nationalism.
[Guest]: You know, it's like, and hence they had to then find a state of their own, right.
[Guest]: But to be an Indian, I mean, there is a choice, there's a choice between a capacious, open
[Guest]: minded, dialogic form of nationalism and a hateful, visceral, vindictive, vengeful form
[Guest]: of nationalism.
[Guest]: There is a choice between Gandhi and Golwalkar, you know, there's a choice between Ambedkar
[Guest]: and Savarkar.
[Guest]: These are choices that are there for us.
[Guest]: And we must choose, I mean, we must not say nationalism is tribal, nationalism is bad.
[Guest]: Nationalism is a Western invention.
[Guest]: No, because I think most ordinary people want to know, I think what the anti-CIA movement
[Guest]: has done is brought back the idea, I mean, Indian flag, I mean, in a few years, the Indian
[Guest]: flag has gone from being imposed by the Supreme Court to being claimed by ordinary people.
[Guest]: It's great.
[Guest]: And the preamble is being read all over the country.
[Guest]: And the flag, I mean, the symbolism of the flag, what is the symbolism of the flag?
[Guest]: If you read Gandhi on the flag, if you read Gandhi on the flag, it is the saffron is Hindu
[Guest]: Hindu.
[Guest]: The green is Islam, and the white is all the other religions who are being protected by
[Guest]: the two larger ones.
[Guest]: I mean, it's a beautiful image.
[Guest]: That's a Gandhi's image of the colors of the flag.
[Guest]: That is the understanding of the colors of the flag.
[Guest]: Right now.
[Guest]: So I think these are things which shows that nationalism mean, I mean, it may not matter
[Guest]: to intellectuals.
[Guest]: It may not matter to global travelers, to entrepreneurs who travel around the world,
[Amit Varma]: but it matters to ordinary people.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I have two thoughts here.
[Amit Varma]: One is, of course, that we are hardwired for tribalism and nationalism plays into that.
[Amit Varma]: But my other thought, and this is where I'll be a bit of a skeptic with, you know, when
[Amit Varma]: you talk about a good nationalism and a bad nationalism, it almost seems good and bad.
[Amit Varma]: I would say more accommodating, more accommodating and more hateful.
[Amit Varma]: The issue I take with this is that any kind of ideology, which is based on identity, isn't
[Amit Varma]: it necessarily exclusionary?
[Guest]: No, if it's based on values, then it's based on values.
[Guest]: It's not based on values within the boundary or controlled by the state, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: I can't demand rights from the Bangladeshi government.
[Guest]: The Bangladeshi citizen can't demand rights from the Indian government.
[Guest]: If you live in a world of territorially bounded nation states, you have to choose between,
[Guest]: to use your phrase, good and bad nationalism, a nationalism of values and a nationalism
[Guest]: of tribalism.
[Guest]: You have to choose between that, right?
[Guest]: But if they're completely open borders and this is a world state, you know, who knows
[Guest]: when that will come, you know, climate change will take care of all of us before that can
[Guest]: ever come.
[Guest]: Maybe then, maybe then you can talk about, you know, something else, right?
[Guest]: But where you have passports, where you have national armies, where you have national currencies,
[Guest]: you have to think of what kind of nationalism you want.
[Amit Varma]: So what you're really saying is that nationalism based on identity is almost inevitable, if
[Amit Varma]: not necessary, as Sameer would have held.
[Amit Varma]: And what we need to do is layer upon it a system of values, which can make us more...
[Guest]: Values that are a combination of universal values and particular values.
[Guest]: In the sense that a resident of Israel doesn't really have to bother about, has to bother
[Guest]: about gender equality, but not about caste equality.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: If you know what I mean, right?
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: I mean, they all find they can all speak Hebrew, but in a country like India, which has 14
[Guest]: classical languages, should we all speaking Hindi?
[Guest]: So it has to be a blend of local things determined by a local cultural context and truly universal
[Guest]: values.
[Guest]: I mean, individual freedom, gender equality, nonviolence are universal values.
[Amit Varma]: Those are universal values.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll now ask you to expound on patriotism.
[Amit Varma]: But before I do that, I'll read out one of my favorite passages from an essay that Orwell
[Amit Varma]: wrote on it, where he gives a distinction between nationalism and patriotism.
[Amit Varma]: And he says, quote, by nationalism, I mean, first of all, the habit of assuming that human
[Amit Varma]: beings can be classified like insects and that whole blocks of millions of 10s of millions
[Amit Varma]: of people can be confidently labeled good or bad.
[Amit Varma]: But secondly, and this is much more important, I mean, the habit of identifying oneself with
[Amit Varma]: a single nation or other unit, placing it beyond good and evil, and recognizing no other
[Amit Varma]: duty than that of advancing his interests.
[Amit Varma]: Nationalism is not to be confused with patriotism.
[Amit Varma]: Both words are normally used in so vague a way that any definition is liable to be challenged.
[Amit Varma]: But one must draw a distinction between them, since two different and even opposing ideas
[Amit Varma]: are involved.
[Amit Varma]: By patriotism, I mean devotion to a particular place and a particular way of life, which
[Amit Varma]: one believes to be the best in the world, but has no wish to force on other people.
[Amit Varma]: Patriotism is office nature defensive, both militarily and culturally.
[Amit Varma]: Nationalism on the other hand, is inseparable from the desire for power.
[Amit Varma]: The abiding purpose of every nationalist is to secure more power and more prestige, not
[Amit Varma]: for himself, but for the nation or other unit in which he has chosen to sink his own individuality.
[Amit Varma]: And in your excellent speech at the KLF, you also expounded on the sort of the different
[Guest]: elements of patriotism.
[Guest]: There is obviously a strong resonance between what Orwell is saying, what I'm, you know,
[Guest]: what I said that, you know, I've read Orwell all my life.
[Guest]: I mean, between my MA and my PhD, a Bangalore friend, Meera Rao, gifted me four volumes
[Guest]: of his collected essay journalism.
[Guest]: So six months before my PhD, all I read was Orwell.
[Guest]: So you know, quite a lot of Orwell seeped into me.
[Guest]: But there's a still I'd like to elaborate on Orwell says, he says somewhere, you know,
[Guest]: nationalism is about defending, advancing the interests of the nation.
[Guest]: Just see the first.
[Guest]: Yeah, I'll just read that out.
[Amit Varma]: The interests of the nation.
[Amit Varma]: Where he says, interests of the nation or something like that, identifying oneself with
[Amit Varma]: a single nation or other unit, placing it beyond good or evil, recognizing no other
[Guest]: duty than that of advancing his interests.
[Guest]: So the interests of the nation.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: Now, what Gandhi did, there is a subtle difference between Orwell and me or between a British
[Guest]: patriot and Indian patriot.
[Guest]: It's the interests of the citizens.
[Guest]: You know, Orwell talks about a land and a kind of mystical attachment to the land because
[Guest]: England is a island and far away, and it was never colonized, right?
[Guest]: Indians were talking about, in some ways, Indian patriotism is actually more advanced
[Guest]: because they're talking about the interests of the citizens because we are building it
[Guest]: afresh.
[Guest]: I mean, we had to get rid of the British and then cultivate these values and virtues among
[Guest]: our citizens.
[Guest]: So what we're talking about, you know, is not the interests of the nation, but the interests
[Guest]: of the citizens of the nation, which is which sometimes may be congruent and in many other
[Guest]: times may not be congruent.
[Guest]: And Hindutva is only about the interests of the nation.
[Guest]: They always reside.
[Guest]: I mean, that's what I think, you know, also, I think a very interesting difference between
[Guest]: British patriotism, even of the best kind of the Orwellian kind.
[Guest]: I mean, though Orwell may have been a Republican, is that we are Republicans.
[Guest]: We don't believe in inherited status.
[Guest]: You know, nothing offends me more than one, not many things offend me, but one thing that
[Guest]: offends me a hell of a lot is when people, including people in the Congress party, like
[Guest]: Jyotindra Singh, Indian capitol Amrita Singh, in private want to be addressed as your highness.
[Guest]: In private?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, sometimes in public too.
[Guest]: They claim that they are, you know, because of the Royal Indians and British patriots
[Guest]: are see the monarchy as part of their patriotic tradition.
[Guest]: It holds them together.
[Guest]: It's been there for centuries.
[Guest]: But we, I mean, why 26 January is so important is that it denotes the time when India transformed
[Guest]: itself was no longer a dominion, but became a republic, right?
[Guest]: In a republic, every citizen is equal, right?
[Guest]: It's like the French and the Americans had true revolutions, the British never did because
[Guest]: they never got rid of their royalty, right?
[Guest]: We had a true democratic revolution in the same way when the constitution came into effect.
[Guest]: And the republic implies that every citizen is equal.
[Guest]: Of course, in theory, that's not true.
[Guest]: You're still entitlements of birth and privilege and caste and class and gender.
[Guest]: But broadly, I mean, I would say, I mean, obviously, I agree as much as Orwell says,
[Guest]: but we had to struggle for the freedom struggle and Britain never had a freedom struggle.
[Guest]: And the great thing about the Indian freedom struggle, this is where I want to bring up
[Guest]: Gandhi again.
[Guest]: You know, Sunil Khillani, in a review of my Gandhi biography, had a wonderful phrase.
[Guest]: You know, he often comes up with profound insights.
[Guest]: And this was in a book review of somebody else's book.
[Guest]: He said, Gandhi was battling the British, but he was also battling India.
[Guest]: That is the darker side of India, oppression of women, oppression of caste, hatred of minority.
[Guest]: It's a fabulous phrase.
[Guest]: You know, Gandhi was battling India too, right?
[Guest]: It was a battle against India, as well as a battle against the British.
[Guest]: And it's in that struggle, in that struggle against the more unpleasant, unappealing
[Guest]: sides of Indian tradition, that Indian patriotism was born.
[Guest]: You know, for the Hindutavadi, Indian tradition had no unpleasant and unappealing sides.
[Guest]: It was always fabulous.
[Guest]: And we were always better than the rest of the world, right?
[Guest]: And I think the great thing about the freedom struggle, and the great thing about people
[Guest]: like Gandhi and Ambedkar, and even Nehru, was they recognized that Indian society was
[Guest]: deeply fraught.
[Guest]: The way we brutalized our women, the way we treated our low caste, the way we were not
[Guest]: open to modern learning and science, and were self-satisfied about our past achievements,
[Guest]: our past civilizational achievements, and this self-critical aspect of the freedom struggle,
[Guest]: I think is incredibly important to remember and renew today.
[Amit Varma]: And that's actually just a fantastic quote by Sunil Killani, which you pointed out.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm going to ask a follow up question based on that, after we take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break.
[Amit Varma]: If you've gotten so far in this podcast, it means you like listening to good audio content
[Amit Varma]: and you're thirsty for knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: In that case, I'd urge you to check out Storytel, the sponsors of this episode.
[Amit Varma]: Storytel is an audiobook platform that has a massive range of audiobooks from around
[Amit Varma]: the world.
[Amit Varma]: Their international collection is stellar, but so is their local collection.
[Amit Varma]: They have a fantastic range of Marathi and Hindi audiobooks.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, I do a weekly podcast there called The Book Club with Amit Verma, in which I
[Amit Varma]: talk about one book every week, giving context, giving you a taste of the book and so on.
[Amit Varma]: As long as Storytel sponsors the show, I will recommend an audiobook that I liked on that
[Amit Varma]: platform every week.
[Amit Varma]: My recommendation for this week is Open by Andrei Agassi, the best sports autobiography
[Amit Varma]: I have read.
[Amit Varma]: Most sports autobiographies tend to be about the glory of the sport and the sportsperson,
[Amit Varma]: a collation of high points.
[Amit Varma]: But Open is about pain and insecurity and weakness and self-doubt, told with honesty
[Amit Varma]: and self-awareness.
[Amit Varma]: Lovely book.
[Amit Varma]: Open by Andrei Agassi on Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: Download their app or visit Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Remember, that's Storytel with a single L. Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Ram Guha, and we are taking stock of our republic, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you quoted Sunil Khilnani, you know, who said these words in a book review
[Amit Varma]: of your book on Gandhi, where he said that India was not just battling the empire, Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: was not just battling the empire, he was also battling India.
[Amit Varma]: And my question here is, and again, this is something I've tried to explore over multiple
[Amit Varma]: episodes with multiple people, is that there is a notion that the constitution that we
[Amit Varma]: got was a liberal constitution, though to my mind, it's not liberal enough, but whatever
[Amit Varma]: the constitution that we got was a liberal constitution, but imposed upon an illiberal
[Amit Varma]: society.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, can that imposition be liberal at all?
[Amit Varma]: Taking that thought further, it is held by some now that what has happened today with
[Amit Varma]: the BJP in power, with Modi in power, is that politics has caught up with society, that
[Amit Varma]: this is always how our society was.
[Amit Varma]: So now I have a couple of questions there following up from this.
[Amit Varma]: Let me answer that.
[Guest]: It's a very good question.
[Guest]: It's a very good question, where you say that it was a liberal constitution imposed on a
[Guest]: illiberal society.
[Guest]: Now Gandhi recognized this, Gandhi recognized that and Ambedkar and Nehru all recognized,
[Guest]: which is why they spent the decades leading up to independence, trying to reform society.
[Guest]: Particularly Gandhi and Ambedkar on the question of caste, Gandhi and Ambedkar on the question
[Guest]: of caste and Ambedkar and Nehru on the question of gender equality, recognized that this was
[Guest]: an illiberal society.
[Guest]: Now, as a historian, I'd like to reemphasize that Gandhi was absolutely alert to this.
[Guest]: What did Gandhi's early death, premature death read us off?
[Guest]: Now again, I'd like to give some historical facts that would not be known to your listeners.
[Guest]: Had Gandhi not been murdered on 30th January 1948, what would he have done in the following
[Guest]: weeks?
[Guest]: He was due to go leave for Sevagram on the 2nd of February to have a meeting with constructive
[Guest]: workers.
[Guest]: Pushed back one day, 29th January 1948, Gandhi said to casually, he said to some people,
[Guest]: we must think of disbanding the Congress and making it Lok Sevak committees.
[Guest]: He didn't mean disband the government.
[Guest]: He meant that while the government will run, while Nehru and Patel, people like Nehru and
[Guest]: Patel will be in government, he placed them there, he blessed them as running government.
[Guest]: We will have a countervailing force in civil society composed of freedom, people from the
[Guest]: freedom movement who are temperamentally not interested in administration, but in reforming
[Guest]: on the ground and in liberal society, right?
[Guest]: So Gandhi's clear understanding was constructive work is as important as politics.
[Guest]: It goes back to the 1920s and he was going to go to Sevagram on the 2nd of February to
[Guest]: meet social workers to tell them what could have been done or what should be done to keep
[Guest]: the government honest, to keep it on its toes, right?
[Guest]: And if Gandhi had not died, if he'd lived another few years, you would have had a spread
[Guest]: of the social reform movement within society.
[Guest]: Gandhi recognized that you can't simply trust the state to reform society.
[Guest]: You have to have on-ground reforms by activist individuals working non-violently, you know,
[Guest]: going from Mahalla to Mahalla.
[Guest]: You just can't have a law saying untouchability is abolished.
[Guest]: You have to go have people going from Mahalla to Mahalla, village to village saying open
[Guest]: every well to every person.
[Guest]: You can't just have a law saying women are equal to men.
[Guest]: You have to go travel around and to use a later phrase, conscientize ordinary folks
[Guest]: about the importance of giving women equal rights.
[Guest]: So Gandhi absolutely recognized this.
[Guest]: Now among the tragedies of Gandhi's premature death was that Gandhi had not had clearly
[Guest]: anointed his political successors.
[Guest]: He had said Nehru and Patel will succeed me politically, but he had not anointed his successors
[Guest]: in the social work field.
[Guest]: And through a, I mean, this is maybe a separate discussion, but through pure accident, Gandhi
[Guest]: died and Vinoba Bhave appointed himself.
[Guest]: And in my view, he gave that social reform movement a totally wrong direction and a spiritual
[Guest]: and mystical direction rather than focusing on proper ground level constructive work.
[Guest]: So I think Gandhi recognized this.
[Guest]: Gandhi is, again, this is the difference between Gandhi and people like Bose and Bhagat Singh,
[Guest]: who said political power first and foremost, get rid of the British as early as possible.
[Guest]: On the other hand, Gandhi said, we must prepare ourselves for independence to go back to what
[Guest]: Khilani remarks, his battle was against India too.
[Guest]: And he would have, even after independence, Gandhi would have continued the battle against
[Guest]: India at the level of everyday life.
[Amit Varma]: And that's what we missed.
[Amit Varma]: And here I have to say that, obviously, I agree completely with Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one of my favorite quotations about politics is by Andrew Breitbart, which is
[Amit Varma]: quote, politics is downstream of culture, stop quote, which is that, you know, unless
[Amit Varma]: you change the culture, you cannot change the politics.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what seems to have happened is that one, the political infrastructure that then was
[Amit Varma]: shaping the constitution and the country who are today disparagingly termed as liberal
[Amit Varma]: elites, basically framed a constitution that at that time was out of sync with the culture.
[Amit Varma]: And what also seems to have happened at that fight, and it wasn't just Gandhi's fight,
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure a lot of people cared about it, of bringing about a liberal society, essentially,
[Amit Varma]: some would argue pessimistically that it has failed.
[Amit Varma]: And because it has failed, today, we have the kind of politics we have.
[Amit Varma]: And tangentially, the other contestation, like I did an episode with JP Narayan, the
[Amit Varma]: great political thinker, and his point was that India is not necessarily an illiberal
[Amit Varma]: society.
[Amit Varma]: And to some extent, I get where he's coming from, I call it an illiberal society because
[Amit Varma]: of the way women are treated and the lower caste are treated and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, our traditions of tolerance and diversity are such that it strikes me
[Amit Varma]: that it's both and that the so called conservative government in power is actually in one sense
[Amit Varma]: a radical government, because they're going against our traditions of tolerance.
[Guest]: I mean, as in, you know, you know, this whole question of Ayodhya, one, one temple, one,
[Guest]: one holy city for the Hindus and so on.
[Guest]: Absolutely, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: So, so would you say that that Gandhian struggle is finally lost today?
[Guest]: You know, I would have said it two months ago, I would have not said it's lost, I would
[Guest]: have what I would have said, Amit, is, and I have said it in print, is to invoke my friend
[Guest]: Gopal Krishna Gandhi, who is only incidentally a grandson of Gandhi, but essentially a scholar
[Guest]: and thinker and profound modern interpreter of Gandhi's thought.
[Guest]: And Gopal Gandhi often used to say to me in private, particularly in the 1990s, the brutal
[Guest]: decade that saw the demolition of the Babri Masjid and so on, he used to say to me, like
[Guest]: the Buddha, India will kick out Gandhi.
[Guest]: And like the Buddha, the rest of the world will affirm Gandhi.
[Guest]: So I knew that Gandhi would never die.
[Guest]: I mean, that, you know, there would be people in Eastern Europe, in Latin America, everywhere
[Guest]: else who would pick up Gandhi and renew his ideas.
[Guest]: But maybe I was taught by Gopal that Gandhi's influence was steadily diminished within India
[Guest]: over the last two months, and particularly the protests against DCA.
[Guest]: Because of these two aspects of Gandhi that they brought, one is Hindu-Muslim harmony,
[Guest]: and individual civil disobedience, you know, people's power, individual and collective.
[Amit Varma]: And the photograph of the young girl offering a rose to the policeman was so Gandhian.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: And individual in the sense that it is not organized, contrary to what the BJP says,
[Guest]: this is totally spontaneous.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, I said, the day I was detained and came out in an interview, I said that
[Guest]: in the detention center, there were 400 people, students were overrepresented, and the Congress
[Guest]: Party was underrepresented, even though, you know, Karnataka is the gutter of the Congress
[Guest]: Party, but it's pretty strong here as the main opposition party.
[Guest]: So I think these two aspects of Gandhi have come back in India through this, the current
[Guest]: wave of protests, you know, spirited coming out in the streets, non-violently.
[Guest]: And you know, this whole, I mean, that great, the slogan, I don't know who coined it in
[Guest]: Bombay.
[Guest]: Jab Hindu-Muslim razi, kya karega nazi?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: The name escapes me, actually, you know, somebody put this up on his Instagram, and then it
[Guest]: got onto a t-shirt.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Jab Hindu-Muslim razi, kya karega nazi?
[Guest]: Now, it's that kind of sharp satire.
[Guest]: The phrasing is not Gandhian, but the sentiment is totally Gandhian, the phrasing is too satirical
[Guest]: and sharp to be Gandhian, right?
[Guest]: So this aspect, you know, I mean, Hindu-Muslim-Sikh-Isai razi, you know, I mean, the whole Rangarhad
[Guest]: in Shaheen Bagh by Sardars, you know, that's fabulous.
[Guest]: I mean, that's like, that's just wonderful, right?
[Guest]: So I'm hopeful that Gandhi has not been forgotten in his homeland.
[Guest]: I mean, two months ago, I would have thought that it's elsewhere that people are, you know,
[Guest]: truly remembering him.
[Guest]: I mean, the Prime Minister quotes him totally cynically and instrumentally.
[Guest]: I mean, the Prime Minister can write an article on October 2nd in the New York Times, and
[Guest]: not mention Hindu-Muslim harmony, which is what Gandhi lived and died for.
[Guest]: You can mention Einstein praised him, Mandela praised him, all kinds of stuff, right?
[Guest]: So but I think ordinary people, and admirably, not only Gandhi, but also Ambedkar, also Bhagat
[Amit Varma]: Singh.
[Amit Varma]: That's great.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I wrote a piece on this, where I was sort of looking at politics through the lens of
[Amit Varma]: economics and trying to examine why is it that during our freedom struggle, we had so
[Amit Varma]: many great leaders, and people often bemoan that we don't have leaders like that anymore.
[Amit Varma]: And to me, the economic answer boiled down to incentives, that at that point in time,
[Amit Varma]: all the leaders that we had, they weren't motivated by the lust for power, because it
[Amit Varma]: was no power to we had, they were motivated by abstract ideals, and that idealism to them
[Amit Varma]: there.
[Amit Varma]: And it was that kind of person who got attracted.
[Amit Varma]: And in the modern Indian state, where the state is such a rent-seeking predatory behemoth,
[Amit Varma]: it attracts the kind of people who will lust for power and who will go on.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what has given me hope in the last couple of months, as you said, is that that kind
[Amit Varma]: of spirit, that kind of idealism seems to be reappearing in the public spaces right
[Amit Varma]: now, but is not yet there in politics, but is reappearing in public spaces and maybe
[Amit Varma]: out of the crucible of this future politicians will emerge.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, I sort of look at the political marketplace.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll talk about the BGP in the Congress.
[Amit Varma]: But the example that kind of struck me was that in Delhi, the Aam Aadmi Party made the
[Amit Varma]: perhaps practical, perhaps cynical decision to not fight this battle for principles just
[Amit Varma]: because they are running an election on governance very soon, extremely soon, and therefore not
[Amit Varma]: to get involved in all of this.
[Amit Varma]: But what they have done because of this is that they didn't speak out against 370.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, they supported the abolition of 370.
[Amit Varma]: They have completely ignored this issue.
[Amit Varma]: So what is therefore happening is that in the political space, there is no one speaking
[Amit Varma]: of for these principles anymore, because the incentives of oh, I have to win the next election
[Amit Varma]: is coming into play.
[Amit Varma]: And they're behaving rationally.
[Amit Varma]: We can't judge them for this.
[Amit Varma]: But how do we get past this?
[Guest]: You know, it's hard to say.
[Guest]: I mean, it's very, very hard to see how societies transform themselves.
[Guest]: And I mean, the last time we had a movement of this kind, you know, the India against
[Guest]: corruption, it gave birth to the cult of Kedriwal, who, you know, threw everyone else out of
[Guest]: his movement and his party, right.
[Guest]: But I think there's, I think, because there's so many young people and across India, it's
[Guest]: not just Delhi, I mean, the media is focused on Delhi, because the media is in Delhi and
[Guest]: Shaheen Bagh is in Delhi and Jamia is in Delhi.
[Guest]: But all over, you know, if you see the scenes from Bihar, today, there's something from
[Guest]: Nagaland, Kerala, Kerala, Kerala, of course, Kerala, of course.
[Guest]: But many in Bombay, I mean, I think the BJP's hubris in not striking a deal with the Shiv Sena
[Guest]: has been good for Indian democracy, whatever else, you know, and Indian pluralism.
[Guest]: I mean, it's made, you know, just as an aside, Eric Hobsbawm, in his memoir, in Interesting
[Guest]: Times, has a kind of a throwaway line where he says, there are many ex-communists.
[Guest]: But have you ever met an ex-fascist?
[Guest]: All right, now, I thought that's quite a profound line.
[Guest]: But I think in Maharashtra now, there are quite a few ex-fascists, I mean, if you look
[Guest]: at what the Shiv Sena is talking about now, which is great, I mean, if the Shiv Sena has
[Guest]: abandoned his hardline Hindutva, you know, much more hardline even than the BJP, right?
[Guest]: And now, I was told, I don't know that the preamble is going to be read out in every
[Guest]: school in Maharashtra, right?
[Guest]: So I think these things are happening, and whether they translate into diminished returns
[Guest]: for the BJP, in the ballot box, whether they translate into true pluralism and tolerance
[Guest]: and governance, we don't know.
[Guest]: But the last two or three months have been the most hopeful in India for a decade.
[Guest]: Well before, I mean, I think from 2010-11, Manmohan Singh lost the plot, you know, in
[Guest]: many different ways.
[Guest]: And I'm not one who is nostalgic for Manmohan Singh's regime, his first term was okay, second
[Guest]: term was disastrous.
[Guest]: He demeaned the office of the Prime Minister in many, many ways, including in his utterly
[Guest]: shameful comment that I'd be honored to serve under Rahul Gandhi.
[Guest]: He prepared the way for Narendra Modi comments of that kind.
[Guest]: So I'm the most hopeful I've been in a decade, I'd say.
[Amit Varma]: And let's kind of talk about the BJP, because it's very interesting that again, it might
[Amit Varma]: seem from this vantage point, that it was inevitable that it would end up here with
[Amit Varma]: Modi and Shah doing the things that they are doing.
[Amit Varma]: But it wasn't inevitable long ago, you once had a Prime Minister in Vajpayee, who many
[Amit Varma]: regard as one of the best we have had, a far more cultured man than the people in charge
[Amit Varma]: today.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, what does the evolution of the BJP tell you, and also, there is a dichotomy
[Amit Varma]: here that on the one hand, the BJP is a one party driven by ideology, which is the ideology
[Amit Varma]: of the Sindhu Rashtra, and blah, blah, blah, which comes from its parent, the RSS.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, they are brought to power and are expanding by the will to power,
[Amit Varma]: yes, where they are doing mergers and acquisitions and expanding vote base and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, so what gives are they at some point going to become an efficient vote gathering
[Amit Varma]: machine much like the Congress once was and ideology doesn't matter, or is this ideology
[Amit Varma]: actually going to play out in the ways that in the last year, it seems certainly it's
[Amit Varma]: accelerated?
[Guest]: No, I think the ideology is has accelerated.
[Guest]: There's no question about it has become more strongly ideological in his second term.
[Guest]: And he's done things that I mean, I'm in some ways, because it's shown its naked ugly face,
[Guest]: you've had the pushback because they thought that with Kashmir and Ayodhya was not enough,
[Guest]: we should also have this third, you know, radical move.
[Guest]: But I think the way the BJP has transformed, and I'm not the first to say this, I mean,
[Guest]: people like Suhashpal Sikar and others said it before, is that it's become a high command
[Guest]: party, which it never was.
[Guest]: I mean, it's sort of mimicked what Indira Gandhi and Sanjay Gandhi did to the Congress
[Guest]: in the 70s, that they converted a decentralized, diverse party with many vigorous state units,
[Guest]: district units, important state leaders into this high command party.
[Guest]: I mean, in that column, I mentioned that I wrote about Modi not trusting advisors.
[Guest]: I mean, why didn't he take Shivraj Singh Chavan and Rahman Singh into this cabinet, right?
[Guest]: Because they have to push everyone down.
[Guest]: Modi and Shah have to control everything in the way in which Indira Gandhi and Sanjay
[Guest]: Gandhi did and later Sonia Gandhi and Ahmed Patel did.
[Guest]: I mean, Sonia Gandhi and Ahmed Patel are the same.
[Guest]: And even now, if the Congress wants to revive itself, it has to rid itself of that culture.
[Guest]: I mean, it has to give people like Amrindar Singh and Sindhara Maiya and Bhupesh Bagel
[Guest]: much more space than Mr. Ahmed Patel and Mrs. Sonia Gandhi are willing to give them, right?
[Guest]: So this transformational BJP, right, that it's not a grassroots party, it has become
[Guest]: a high command party.
[Guest]: And you know, this may of course, it's already had some diminishing returns.
[Guest]: You know, one very interesting, I mean, these are things that have to be empirically studied.
[Guest]: It's also become a cult of personality party, which it never was before.
[Guest]: It was always against Vyakti Pooja, right?
[Guest]: Even in Vajpayee's time, there was a three murti, Vajpayee, Advani, Joshi, right?
[Guest]: It was always against Vyakti Pooja and now it's a cult of personality.
[Guest]: It's a cult of personality promoted by the Prime Minister and endorsed by second in command.
[Guest]: Who thinks, rightly or wrongly, that Modi's name wins elections.
[Guest]: So he has also abandoned this RSS's belief in collective leadership and it's all cult
[Guest]: of personality.
[Guest]: Now, this has had diminishing returns in the sense that in Jharkhand, for example, the
[Guest]: argument was that when social reform was done by the Manmohan Singh regime, so Mandrega
[Guest]: was Dharmanand, if Raman Singh implemented Mandrega well, he would get some credit.
[Guest]: But now if Raghubir Das implements, you know, Swachh Bharat well, he'll get no credit because
[Guest]: it's only Modi's photograph everywhere, you know.
[Guest]: So, right.
[Guest]: So, this is the kind of the khaikabad culture and the cult of the personality are transforming
[Guest]: the BJP in ways in which actually may be sowing the seeds of his long term decline.
[Guest]: That's the hopeful part.
[Guest]: You know, obviously, the not so hopeful part is that while adopting a high command culture,
[Guest]: while promoting and embellishing a cult of personality, it is not abandoned, but rather
[Guest]: consolidated its hardcore sectarian ideological bigoted beliefs against minorities.
[Guest]: And that's the dangerous part.
[Guest]: But electorally, I think they may have still win state elections, they may win by a grand
[Guest]: start in four years and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: But I think once you undermine state units in the way that they're doing, and local leadership,
[Guest]: you know, you, you catapult people from the top that you know, in Haryana, even the election
[Guest]: Amit Shah will decide, Maharashtra, even Amit Shah will decide, it won't be the local legislature.
[Guest]: That's what Indira Gandhi and Sonia Gandhi used to do and see what happened to the Congress
[Amit Varma]: Party.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, when I was a child, I remember seeing this very striking image of a group of of
[Amit Varma]: a chronology, chronology, Samjhi, of a chronology of mafia dons, from one to another.
[Amit Varma]: And the first guy was five foot six, and everyone who succeeded him, which was basically a second
[Amit Varma]: in command taking charge after he died, or whatever was shorter than him, till you got
[Amit Varma]: to a guy at the end, who was four foot nine, which kind of seems to speak to the tendency
[Amit Varma]: of some leaders to always appoint people next to them who cannot threaten them.
[Amit Varma]: That's it.
[Guest]: And, and, and which is why you have these different parties.
[Guest]: I mean, what Modi should really have done, Shivraj Singh Chavan, Raman Singh and Vasundhara
[Guest]: Jain to the cabinet, and they would completely have differed him, they did they don't want
[Guest]: his job, you know, he's the Supreme Leader, but there are three competent and experienced
[Guest]: administrators, right?
[Guest]: Surely you want them in your team.
[Guest]: Are you so insecure that you must only have your Rajya Sabha MPs like Nirmala Sitharaman
[Guest]: and Jai Shankar and others to just, you know, who are toadies to you?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is mystifying.
[Amit Varma]: The other tendency which people have pointed out about the BJP is that each leader seems
[Amit Varma]: to make the leader before him seem moderate, like Vajpayee to Shama Prasad and Advani to
[Amit Varma]: Vajpayee and Modi to Advani and maybe Amit Shah.
[Guest]: No, I don't think Vajpayee was less moderate than Shama Prasad.
[Guest]: You didn't?
[Guest]: Not at all.
[Guest]: Shama Prasad was essentially...
[Guest]: No, no, no, no, no, no, I don't think so, I don't think so, but certainly, Advani, Vajpayee
[Guest]: made Advani seem moderate, and you know, Advani made Vajpayee seem moderate and Modi makes
[Guest]: Advani seem moderate.
[Amit Varma]: Is there a logic to this procession that each successor then has to become more strident
[Guest]: to appeal to the base or something?
[Guest]: You know, there's one aspect of what's going on in our country today, which I think insufficient
[Guest]: attention has been paid, is the regional diversity.
[Guest]: Modi is an all India leader, but Adityanath cannot become an all India leader, not because
[Guest]: he doesn't have charisma, but his charisma is of a kind that will appeal in UP and Bihar
[Guest]: and not in Maharashtra and in Karnataka and in Kerala, but this is something that Modi
[Guest]: shared only with Indira Gandhi and Nehru, that his charisma, you know, went across state
[Guest]: boundaries for whatever reason, you know, you felt this guy is for all of India, maybe
[Guest]: not for the Muslims, but for Hindus everywhere, at least, right, but Adityanath went to Kerala
[Guest]: to lead a march and had to return within one day.
[Guest]: So I think it'd be interesting to see, he clearly is positioning himself as some kind
[Guest]: of successor in the short to medium term, I mean, if you look at it, what he's been
[Guest]: doing in UP.
[Guest]: But I think this kind of pan Indian appeal that Modi has, which even Vajpayee didn't
[Guest]: have in the same way, you know, Vajpayee was a great coalition builder, a great team builder,
[Guest]: but he didn't have that kind of vote gathering ability that Modi had, even still today has,
[Amit Varma]: and only Nehru and Indira had it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And now we inevitably also have to turn our attention to the Congress.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, my sentiment of the Congress is this way I see the nation today, the our
[Amit Varma]: big problem is that Modi is in power.
[Amit Varma]: Part of the reason for that is that there is a terribly weak opposition.
[Amit Varma]: Part of the reason for that terribly weak opposition is that our largest opposition
[Amit Varma]: party, the only other national party has been crippled by the feudalism within the party.
[Amit Varma]: So if you oppose Modi, you have to oppose that feudalism.
[Amit Varma]: You have to therefore oppose the family and you've got a lot of flag for it recently.
[Amit Varma]: And I absolutely felt for you and I share your views on this.
[Amit Varma]: But and to me, what I tell my friends is whatever anger you might have against the family for
[Amit Varma]: all the harm they've done through the decades, the point is, and this is something that I'm
[Amit Varma]: sure you'd feel viscerally that the Congress was once a vessel for really great leaders.
[Amit Varma]: And that organizational infrastructure still exists.
[Amit Varma]: So if only the spaces are for new leaders to come up, that's where the hope lies.
[Guest]: No, they still are some good leaders in the Congress.
[Guest]: And they're not the normal leaders whom Delhi people talk about.
[Guest]: They're not Sindhiya and Pilot.
[Guest]: They're not Sindhiya and Pilot or Shashi Tharoor, no, no, no.
[Guest]: As far as I can see, there are three leaders of the Congress who are, I think, are actually
[Guest]: mass leaders.
[Guest]: One is Amarinder Singh, the other is Siddharam Iyer of my state.
[Guest]: And the third is the most interesting because he's the youngest and he's from a Hindi-speaking
[Guest]: state is Bhupesh Bagel of Chhattisgarh, who in a year in power has actually grown enormously.
[Guest]: And it'll be interesting to see whether the high command and the family sees him as a
[Guest]: threat, which they very well might already.
[Guest]: But he's so I think not Kamal Nath, none of these people, but I think Amarinder and Siddharam
[Guest]: Iyer are strongly rooted in their state.
[Guest]: You know, they have stoked regional pride in a very strong way.
[Guest]: They're seen as tough, authoritative and with a mass connect, right.
[Guest]: And Bhupesh Bagel is a very interesting character.
[Guest]: And if Sonia Gandhi was wise, she would make him the next Congress president, someone like
[Guest]: him the next Congress president, because that's the only way you can take on Modi.
[Guest]: You know, several things have changed, you know, in the popular perception of the Congress
[Guest]: Party.
[Guest]: One is, you know, Sonia Gandhi 20 years ago, many ordinary Indians were sympathetic towards
[Guest]: her.
[Guest]: They said, here is someone who's known to horrible bereavements, you know, the brutal
[Guest]: murder of her adored husband and her revered mother-in-law.
[Guest]: And yet she's come to serve us.
[Guest]: She was hardworking, unlike her son.
[Guest]: She had political acumen, unlike her son.
[Guest]: But today, she's seen in a different light.
[Guest]: 20 years later, she's not seen as the courageous, sacrificing person, but as someone who simply
[Guest]: wants to promote her son.
[Guest]: That's how she's seen.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So even Sonia Gandhi is bad news electorally.
[Guest]: She may be better news for the Congress Party than her son, because she's a more adroit
[Guest]: tactician and because coalition partners trust her.
[Guest]: You know, Sharad Pawar will go and meet Sonia Gandhi, he will not go and meet Rahul Gandhi.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: To that limited extent, she has done some damage control.
[Guest]: But she cannot be the future of the Congress Party.
[Guest]: The family cannot be the future of the Congress Party, if the Congress Party wants to mount
[Guest]: an effective opposition to the BJP.
[Guest]: And I think that's something which I have said many times before.
[Guest]: It so happened that when I said it in Kerala, it got much more flack than ever before, because
[Guest]: I think partly because people felt this is not the time to say it.
[Guest]: When there's an all India movement against this nasty regime, and of course, I yield
[Guest]: to no one in saying it's a nasty regime, why is he diverting attention by talking about
[Guest]: leadership?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: That's why it got so much flack.
[Guest]: I think the closer we come to 2024, this question will have to be posed more and more insistently.
[Guest]: That elections, national elections today, are about ideology, we can fight Hindutva
[Guest]: ideologically, they're about organization and coordination, the opposition needs better
[Guest]: organization and coordination.
[Guest]: But they're also increasingly presidential and hence about personalities, right?
[Guest]: So I think that's a question that will come.
[Guest]: And we'll see how it unfolds.
[Amit Varma]: There's also a question of deeper party cultures, like I remember watching this interview of
[Amit Varma]: Mahua Maitra a while ago, and whatever one thinks of her, she's a young leader who's
[Amit Varma]: captured the imagination.
[Amit Varma]: Correct.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember Mahua Maitra said that she was once part of the Congress 10 years ago,
[Amit Varma]: but she left because she felt there was an ingrained sexism, and that people were condescending
[Amit Varma]: towards her and were not letting it come up.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, she had to make a space somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: And my argument always has been that if the Congress can just, you know, get past that
[Amit Varma]: feudal culture and make space for new leaders, you know, nature abhors a vacuum.
[Amit Varma]: My other sort of...
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: I completely agree with you.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And my other sort of follow up question is that, like on the one hand, of course, you
[Amit Varma]: know, just to go back to the criticism that you received for a moment, I thought what
[Amit Varma]: a lot of people were doing were creating these false binaries, where on the one hand, there's
[Amit Varma]: Modi, on the other hand, there's the opposition, including Rahul.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're criticizing Rahul, you're somehow helping Modi.
[Amit Varma]: And I think absolutely the opposite is true.
[Amit Varma]: They're both part of the problem.
[Amit Varma]: My other question here is that if we look at Indian political parties, and I always
[Amit Varma]: say that we can't look at Indian politics through the standard prism of left and right.
[Amit Varma]: And that's, you know, we are mimicking the West in that frame of thinking, but that frame
[Amit Varma]: is not relevant.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason is that if you apply that frame, you will find that every Indian party in its
[Amit Varma]: economics is left of center in the sense it is statist, and in its approach to society
[Amit Varma]: and culture is right of center in terms of denying freedoms and, you know, the things
[Amit Varma]: that Kamal Nath has done as the CM of MP is the cow protection and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: This then points to a fundamental problem in the culture itself, right?
[Amit Varma]: So where is our hope going to come from?
[Guest]: Well, that's very true.
[Guest]: I broadly absolutely right that when it comes to, you know, economics, leftist or statist
[Guest]: more statist, at best welfarist, most often statist, yeah.
[Guest]: And with a few favorite 20 capitalists are there an open market for everyone.
[Guest]: And when it comes to, you know, culture and freedoms, they are authoritarian.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, this is partly, you know, I don't know, it's partly our diversity, our
[Guest]: size, our poverty, our feudal heritage, so change will be slow and incremental.
[Guest]: But I think young people, things are changing, for example, one way in which India and that's
[Guest]: why Rahul Gandhi is not liked, India is now more democratic, less feudal at the level
[Guest]: of how people think.
[Guest]: I mean, I've said this often before, that why is MS Dhoni an icon?
[Guest]: Because he's not Gavaskar, English speaking from Mumbai, why, you know, why is some young
[Guest]: entrepreneur an icon?
[Guest]: Because they're self made, you know, you know, sons of Ambani's and Bajaj's and Birla's.
[Amit Varma]: So there is a journey going on.
[Guest]: I mean, speak to the aspirational energies of economic growth, urbanization, you know,
[Guest]: social media, the influence of the world is leading to a kind of in some ways, I mean,
[Guest]: look at the transformation in my life, which is attitudes to sexuality, and gay rights.
[Guest]: I mean, it's fantastic, right?
[Guest]: You couldn't have thought of this.
[Guest]: When I was young, I mean, homophobia was everywhere.
[Guest]: That's not true.
[Guest]: I mean, my mother thinks it's absolutely okay to be gay, right?
[Guest]: I mean, she's 93, right?
[Guest]: And this kind of thing is, she's not alone in this, people recognize that these are freedoms
[Guest]: which people must enjoy, you know, so I think they are kind of, I mean, India's always moves
[Guest]: in different, different places, even if the state is, wants to curb dissent and diversity,
[Guest]: and individual freedoms, I think the world is changing in that direction.
[Amit Varma]: I've taken a lot of your time, I'd initially let me inform my listeners, I'd initially
[Amit Varma]: asked Ram for three hours of his time, because I thought we'll do a really nice leisurely
[Amit Varma]: episode, but you you've been you've been traveling a lot, and you're a bit tired.
[Amit Varma]: So we'll sort of wind it up at the 90 minute mark before we go sort of, you know, just
[Amit Varma]: looking at India now, I mean, you're not just a person who's lived his whole life in India,
[Amit Varma]: you have actually lived your significant part of your life in an India that goes before
[Amit Varma]: all of this in your deep studies of history, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And you have sort of, in a sense, you're a prominent public intellectual, and in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: you are out there in the public square as well today, you know, shaping the discourse.
[Amit Varma]: Just looking at what's happening now, if I if I were to say that, what is your greatest
[Amit Varma]: cause for fear of what could happen, say, by 2030?
[Amit Varma]: And what is your greatest cause for hope?
[Amit Varma]: What is the India you are afraid could happen?
[Guest]: And what is the India that?
[Guest]: No, I think, as I said, I'm more hopeful now than I've been for a long time.
[Guest]: I think we have lost a lot of time and ground in the last 15 years to go back to what I
[Guest]: said today.
[Guest]: I think Manmohan Singh second term, and the two terms of Modi have set us back a great
[Guest]: deal economically, institutionally, socially, morally, culturally, they've set us back.
[Guest]: But three months ago, I may have thought to be going to descend into full fledged authoritarianism.
[Guest]: That's not going to happen.
[Guest]: I think the young have seen to that.
[Guest]: And also what happened in Maharashtra has seen to that because a large state going out
[Guest]: of the BJP state of that kind means federalism is a bulwark against full fledged authoritarianism
[Guest]: of the right.
[Guest]: Every half of India is outside the BJP.
[Guest]: And even if four years later, the BJP reclaims MP in Rajasthan, even if they are reelected
[Guest]: in UP, the south and the west and now increasing the east, you know, in the northeast, for
[Guest]: example, is a great amount of discontent.
[Guest]: So but I think this I'd say, if you take the medium term view, not the very long term view,
[Guest]: I think Manmohan Singh, a big one, Narsimha Rao, Vajpayee and Manmohan Singh one, elevated
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: You know, I've always been skeptical of India, but in different ways, despite their flaws,
[Guest]: they were not perfect.
[Guest]: For prime ministers, they made many flaws, but overall, the balance sheet was positive.
[Guest]: That is, a country as large, as diverse, as complex as India, can progress only incrementally.
[Guest]: You can't have a great revolution where you remove inequality, become a world power and
[Guest]: you know, economic growth is 10% all the time.
[Guest]: And there's no Hindu Muslim conflict, there's no caste atrocities.
[Guest]: But Narsimha Rao, Vajpayee and Manmohan Singh, term one, took us to a level where I would
[Guest]: say we were becoming a wealthier, a more secure, a safer, a more comfortable place to live
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Manmohan Singh two, and the two terms of Modi have set us back.
[Guest]: Quite a lot.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And so in that sense, we have lost quite substantially in the last 15 years, we would have by the
[Guest]: time Modi completes the second term.
[Guest]: But you know, if I'm allowed to, you know, quote myself, you know, in India after Gandhi,
[Guest]: I kind of sort of said India is a 50-50 democracy, right?
[Guest]: You remember that, right?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Now, last year, I said, after Kashmir, I said, we are 40-60, going towards 30-70.
[Guest]: I think now we're up to 35 or 40%, right?
[Guest]: So in that sense, we could have crossed the hump, those three prime ministers, Narsimha
[Guest]: Rao, Vajpayee and Manmohan Singh, were leading us to cross the hump.
[Guest]: And now we've gone back somewhere, you know, we're just muddling along in the middle as
[Guest]: we have been.
[Guest]: But the last few months have made me more hopeful.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't think we are going into the abyss as I may have thought three or four
[Guest]: months ago.
[Guest]: It was very, very dark three or four months ago, the pall of fear is broken.
[Guest]: I mean, if you look at the jokes about our ruling duo, I mean, they're delightful.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, Modi met some students, he doesn't have, he won't meet the students
[Guest]: protesting the seat, but he'll have these curated, specially curated meetings with students.
[Guest]: And he was going to tell them all the exams.
[Guest]: And this great cartoonist Satish Acharya had a cartoon which said, you know, if I fail,
[Guest]: can I blame Pakistan?
[Guest]: Lovely.
[Guest]: So the pall of fear is broken.
[Guest]: And I think that's great.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, that's one of the things that gives me hope, all the art and the humor.
[Guest]: Absolutely, absolutely.
[Guest]: I think there's a, I mean, there's a kind of book that will be written on the music,
[Guest]: the poetry, the poems, the art, the cartoons, the graffiti, the slogans that have emerged
[Guest]: from this movement.
[Guest]: I'm sure there'll be, there's a great book, a young anthropologist will write about this.
[Guest]: And I think these are very heartening signs.
[Amit Varma]: Very inspiring words.
[Amit Varma]: And people keep asking me for transcripts of the show.
[Amit Varma]: And my reply to them now is hum kaagas nahi dikhayenge.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: I've always learned so much from your books and from our conversations.
[Amit Varma]: So thanks for that.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, you can follow Ram on Twitter at Ram underscore
[Amit Varma]: Guha.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution.
[Amit Varma]: Do check out all the public policy courses at takshashila.org.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening and hey, go out to a protest somewhere.